# Chapter 6. Finite fields

- [Back to Course Home](index.md)

## Fields

- **Def 6.1 Field**: A field is a communicative ring with the multiplicative identity $1$ in which every nonzero element is invertible.
	- **Examples**: $\mathbb{Q}, \mathbb{R}, \mathbb{C}$
	- **Cor**:
		- $\mathbb{Z}/(p)$ is a field $\iff p$ is a prime.
		- $F[x]/(q(x))$ is a field $\iff q(x)$ is irreducible.
- **Def 6.2 Characteristic**: The characteristic of a field $F$ is defined by the smallest positive integer $p$ s.t.

	$$
	p \cdot 1 = \underbrace{1 + \cdots + 1}_p = 0
	$$

	Denote the characteristic of a field $F$ by $\mathrm{char}(F)$. If there is no such $p$, then $\mathrm{char}(F) = 0$.

- **Thm 6.3**: The characteristic of a field $F$ is either $0$ or a prime.

	???+ info "Proof"

		- Suppose $\mathrm{char}(F) = m > 0$ is a composite number. Then there exist $1 < a, b < m$ such that $m = ab$. Then

			$$
			0 = m \cdot 1 = (ab) \cdot 1 = (a \cdot 1)(b \cdot 1) \implies a \cdot 1 = 0 \text{ or } b \cdot 1 = 0
			$$

			Thus contradicts the minimality of $m$. Therefore, $\mathrm{char}(F)$ must be a prime.

- **Def 6.4 Subfield and Field extension**: Let $E$ be a field and $F \subseteq E$. If $F$ is a field under the same addition and multiplication as $E$, then $E/F$ is called a field extension and $F$ is called a subfield of $E$.
- **Thm 6.5**: If $E/F$ is a field extension, then $E$ can be viewed as a vector space over $F$ with
	- Vector addition：the addition of $F$.
	- Scalar multiplication：$\forall \lambda \in F, \alpha \in F \implies \lambda \cdot \alpha$ is multiplication in $F$.
- **Def 6.6 Prime field**: The prime field of a field $F$ is the smallest subfield of $F$ containing $1$.
- **Thm 6.7**: The prime field of a field $F$ is either $\mathbb{Q}$ or $\mathbb{Z}_p$ for a prime $p$.
- **Def 6.8 Extension degree**: If $E/F$ is a field extension, then the extension degree of $E/F$ is defined to be the dimension $\dim_F E$, denoted by $[E : F]$. The extension $E/F$ is called finite if $[E : F]$ is finite, otherwise $E/F$ is called infinite.

	???+ note "Example"

		$$
		[\mathbb{C},\mathbb{Q}] = +\infty, \quad [\mathbb{C},\mathbb{R}] = 2
		$$

- **Thm 6.9 Properties of Extension Degrees**: Let $E/F, F/K$ be field extension. Then
	- $[E : K] = [E : F][F : K]$
	- $E/K$ is a finite extension $\iff$ Both $E/F$ and $F/K$ and finite extensions.
- **Def 6.10 Ring generation**: Let $E/F$ be a field extension, $\alpha$ be an element of $E$. Then the smallest subring of $E$ containing both $F$ and $\alpha$ is called the ring generated by $\alpha$ over $F$, denoted by $F[\alpha]$.

	$$
	F[\alpha] = \{f(\alpha) : f \in F[x]\}
	$$

- **Def 6.11 Field generation**: Let $E/F$ be a field extension, $\alpha$ be an element of $E$. Then the smallest subfield of $E$ containing both $F$ and $\alpha$ is called the field generated by $\alpha$ over $F$, denoted by $F(\alpha)$.

	$$
	F(\alpha) = \{\frac{f(\alpha)}{g(\alpha)} : f, g \in F[x], g(\alpha) \ne 0\}
	$$

- **Thm 6.12**: Let $m(x)\in F[x]$ be an irreducible polynomial with $\deg(m) = d$ and let $\theta$ be a root of $m(x)$. Then

	$$
	F(\theta) = F[\theta] = \left\{\sum_{i=0}^{d-1} a_i\theta^i : a_i \in F\right\} = \{f(\theta) : f \in F[x], \deg(f) \le d-1\}
	$$

	Furthermore, $[F(\theta) : F] = d$.

	???+ info "Proof"

		1. $F[θ]=\{\sum_{i=0}^{d-1} a_i\theta^i : a_i \in F\} = \{f(\theta) : f \in F[x], \deg(f) \le d-1\}$:
			- $\forall f(\theta) \in F[\theta]$, since we can write $f(x) = m(x)q(x) + r(x)$ with $\deg(r) < \deg(m) = d$, thus $f(\theta) = 0 \cdot q(\theta) + r(\theta) = r(\theta) \in \{\sum_{i=0}^{d-1} a_i\theta^i : a_i \in F\}$, thus $F[\theta] \subseteq \{\sum_{i=0}^{d-1} a_i\theta^i : a_i \in F\} \subseteq \{f(\theta) : f \in F[x]\} = F[\theta]$.
			- Thus $F[\theta] = \{\sum_{i=0}^{d-1} a_i\theta^i : a_i \in F\}$ = $\{f(\theta) : f \in F[x], \deg(f) \le d-1\}$.
		2. $F(\theta) = F[\theta]$:
			- Obviously, $F[\theta] \subseteq F(\theta)$. It is sufficient to show that $F[\theta]$ is a field. Consider nonzero element $r(\theta) \in F[\theta]$.
			- $\forall r(x) = \sum_{i=0}^{d-1} a_i\theta^i \neq 0$, we have not all $a_i$ are zero. Thus $\gcd(r(x), m(x)) = 1$, then by Bézout's identity, there exist $u,v \in F[x]$ s.t. $u(x)r(x) + v(x)m(x) = 1$. Thus $u(\theta)r(\theta) = 1$ since $m(\theta) = 0$, thus $r(\theta)$ is a unit. Therefore, $F[\theta]$ is a field, thus $F[\theta] = F(\theta)$.
		3. $[F(\theta) : F] = d$: Since $\{1, \theta, \ldots, \theta^{d-1}\}$ is a basis of $F(\theta)$ over $F$, we have $[F(\theta) : F] = d$.

- **Thm 6.13**: Let $m(x)\in F[x]$ be an irreducible polynomial with $\deg(m) = d$ and let $\theta$ be a root of $m(x)$. Then

	$$
	F[x]/(m) \simeq F(\theta) = F[\theta]
	$$

	???+ info "Proof"

		- **The first isomorphism theorem**: Let $R, S$ be rings and $\pi : R \to S$ be a ring homomorphism. Then $\ker(\pi) = \{r \in R : \pi(r) = 0\}$ is an ideal of $R$ and $\mathrm{Im}(\pi) = \{\pi(r) : r \in R\}$ is a subring of $S$. Moreover, $R/\ker(\pi) \simeq \mathrm{Im}(\pi)$.
		- Consider the homomorphism

			$$
			\begin{aligned} \pi : F[x] &\to F(\theta) \\ f(x) &\mapsto f(\theta) \end{aligned}
			$$

			Then $\pi$ is a ring homomorphism and $\ker(\pi) = \{f(x) \in F[x] : \pi(f) = f(\theta) = 0\} = \{f(x) \in F[x] : m(x) \mid f(x)\} = (m) = m(x)F[x]$. Thus by the first isomorphism theorem, we have

			$$
			F[x]/(m) \simeq \mathrm{Im}(\pi) = F[\theta] = F(\theta)
			$$

	???+ note "Example"

		1. $x^2+1 \in \mathbb{R}[x]$ is irreducible, $i$ is a root of $x^2+1$. Thus

			$$
			\mathbb{R}[x]/(x^2+1) \simeq \mathbb{R}[i] = \{a+bi : a,b \in \mathbb{R}\} = \mathbb{C}
			$$

		2. $x^2+x+1 \in \mathbb{Z}_2[x]$ is irreducible, since $0,1$ are not roots. Let $\theta$ be a root of $x^2+x+1$. Then

			$$
			\mathbb{Z}_2[x]/(x^2+x+1) \simeq \mathbb{Z}_2[\theta] = \{0, 1, \theta, 1+\theta\}
			$$

			Since $\theta(\theta+1) = \theta^2 + \theta = -1 \equiv 1$, we have $\theta^{-1} = \theta + 1$.

## Finite fields

- **Def 6.14 Finite field**: A field with finitely many elements is called a finite field or Galois field.
- **Thm 6.15 Properties of finite fields**: Let $F$ be a finite field of $q$ elements, then
	1. $\mathrm{char}(F)$ is a prime $p$.
	2. $\forall a, b \in F, (a+b)^p = a^p + b^p$.
	3. $\forall a \in F, a^q = a$.

	???+ info "Proof"

		1. Since $F$ is a field, $\mathrm{char}(F)$ is either $0$ or a prime. If $\mathrm{char}(F) = 0$, then the prime field of $F$ is $\mathbb{Q}$, which is infinite. Thus $\mathrm{char}(F)$ must be a prime $p$.
		2. $\forall a, b \in F$, we have

			$$
			(a+b)^p = \sum_{i=0}^p \binom{p}{i} a^i b^{p-i} = a^p + b^p
			$$

			since $p \mid \binom{p}{i} = \frac{p!}{i!(p-i)!}$ for $1 \le i \le p-1$.|

		3. If $a = 0$, done. If $a \ne 0$, label $q-1$ elements of $F^*$ as $F^* = \{a_1, a_2, \ldots, a_{q-1}\}$. Then $\forall i, a_i^{q-1} = 1$, thus $a_i^q = a_i$. Thus $\forall a \in F, a^q = a$.

- **Thm 6.16 Structure of finite fields**: Let $F$ be a finite field of $q$ elements, then
	1. $q = p^n$ for some prime $p$ and integer $n \ge 1$.
	2. $F^* = F \setminus \{0\}$ is a cyclic group of order $p^n-1$.

	???+ info "Proof"

		1. Since $\mathrm{char}(F) = p$ is a prime, the prime field of $F$ is $\mathbb{Z}_p$. Thus $F/\mathbb{Z}_p$ is a field extension. Since $F$ is finite, $[F : \mathbb{Z}_p] = n < +\infty$. Thus $|F| = p^n$.
		2. Since $F^*$ is a finite subgroup of the multiplicative group of a field, $F^*$ is cyclic.

- **Thm 6.17**: There exists a finite field of $q$ elements $\iff q = p^n$ for some prime $p$ and integer $n \ge 1$.

	???+ info "Proof"

		- $\implies$: has been proved in Thm 6.16.
		- $\impliedby$: Let $m(x) \in \mathbb{Z}_p[x]$ be an irreducible polynomial with $\deg(m) = n$. Then $\mathbb{Z}_p[x]/(m) = \{\sum_{i=0}^{n-1} a_i x^i : a_i \in \mathbb{Z}_p\}$ is a field with $p^n$ elements.

- **Def 6.18 Algebraically closed field**: A field $\Omega$ is called algebraically closed if $\forall f(x) \in \Omega[x]$ with $\deg(f) \ge 1$ has at least one root in $\Omega$.
- **Thm 6.19 Property of algebraically closed fields**: A field $\Omega$ is algebraically closed $\iff \forall f(x) \in \Omega[x]$ with $\deg(f) \ge 1$, $f(x)$ has all roots in $\Omega$.

	???+ info "Proof"

		- $\implies$: Let $f(x) \in \Omega[x]$ with $\deg(f) \ge 1$. We will show that $f(x)$ has all roots in $\Omega$ by induction on $\deg(f)$.
			- If $\deg(f) = 1$, then $f(x)$ has a root in $\Omega$ since $\Omega$ is algebraically closed.
			- If $\deg(f) > 1$, then $f(x)$ has a root $\alpha$ in $\Omega$. Thus $f(x) = (x-\alpha)g(x)$ for some $g(x) \in \Omega[x]$ with $\deg(g) = \deg(f)-1$. By the induction hypothesis, $g(x)$ has all roots in $\Omega$. Thus $f(x)$ has all roots in $\Omega$.
		- $\impliedby$: Obvious.

- **Thm 6.20**: For any field $F$, there exists an algebraically closed field $\Omega$ containing $F$.
- **Thm 6.21**: Let $p$ be a prime and let $n \ge 1$, then there exists a unique finite field of $p^n$ elements.
	- **Notation**: We denote the unique finite field of $q$ elements by $\mathbb{F}_q$ or $\mathrm{GF}_q$.

	???+ info "Proof"

		- **Existence**: has been proved in Thm 6.17.
		- **Uniqueness**: Let $E, F$ be two finite fields with $q=p^n$ elements. Then $\forall a \in E, a^q = a$, i.e. $a$ is a root of $x^q - x$, thus $E = \{a : a^q = a\} \in \Omega$. Similarly, $F = \{a : a^q = a\} \in \Omega$. Thus $E = F$.

	???+ note "Example"

		- $x^3 + x + 1 \in \mathbb{Z}_2[x]$ and $x^3 + x^2 + 1 \in \mathbb{Z}_2[x]$ are irreducible. Let $\alpha$ be a root of $x^3 + x + 1$ and $\beta$ be a root of $x^3 + x^2 + 1$. Then $\mathbb{Z}_2[x]/(x^3 + x + 1) \simeq \mathbb{Z}_2(\alpha)$ and $\mathbb{Z}_2[x]/(x^3 + x^2 + 1) \simeq \mathbb{Z}_2(\beta)$ are two finite fields with $8$ elements. By the uniqueness, we have $\mathbb{Z}_2(\alpha) = \mathbb{Z}_2(\beta) = \mathbb{F}_8$.

- **Thm 6.22**: $\mathbb{F}_{p^n}$ is a field extension of $\mathbb{F}_{p^k} \iff k \mid n$.

	???+ info "Proof"

		- $\implies$: Let $E = \mathbb{F}_{p^n}$ and $F = \mathbb{F}_{p^k}$. Then $[E : F] = \frac{[E : \mathbb{Z}_p]}{[F : \mathbb{Z}_p]} = \frac{n}{k}$. Since $[E : F]$ is an integer, we have $k \mid n$.
		- $\impliedby$: Let $m = \frac{n}{k}$. Then $\mathbb{F}_{p^n}$ is a field extension of $\mathbb{F}_{p^k}$ with extension degree $m$.

- **Alg 6.23**: Construction of finite fields of $p^n$ elements:
	1. Find a monic irreducible polynomial $m(x)$ with $\deg(m) = n$ over $\mathbb{Z}_p$.
	2. Find a root $\theta$ of $m(x)$ in an algebraically closed field $\Omega$ containing $\mathbb{Z}_p$.
	3. Then $\mathbb{Z}_p[x]/(m) \simeq \mathbb{Z}_p(\theta) = \{\sum_{i=0}^{n-1} a_i \theta^i : a_i \in \mathbb{Z}_p\}$ is a finite field with $p^n$ elements.

	???+ note "Example"

		- To construct a finite field of $16$ elements, find an irreducible polynomial of degree $4$ over $\mathbb{Z}_2$.
			- The only irreducible polynomial of degree $2$ over $\mathbb{Z}_2$ is $x^2+x+1$.
			- All irreducible polynomial of degree $4$ over $\mathbb{Z}_2$ are $x^4+x^3+x^2+x+1, x^4+x^3+1, x^4+x+1$. We choose $m(x) = x^4+x+1$ to construct $\mathbb{F}_{16}$.
		- Let $\theta$ be a root of $m(x)$, thus we have

			$$
			\mathbb{F}_{16} = \mathbb{Z}_2[x]/(m) \simeq \mathbb{Z}_2(\theta) = \{a_0 + a_1\theta + a_2\theta^2 + a_3\theta^3 : a_i \in \mathbb{Z}_2\}
			$$

		- And we have if $\theta$ is a root of $m(x)$, then $\theta^{2^n}$ is also a root of $m(x)$.
			- Since $m(\theta) = \theta^4 + \theta + 1 = 0$, thus $\theta^4 = \theta + 1$.
			- $m(\theta^2) = (\theta^2)^4 + \theta^2 + 1 = (\theta^4)^2 + \theta^2 + 1 = (\theta^4 + \theta + 1)^2 = 0$. Thus $\theta^2$ is a root of $m(x)$.
			- $m(\theta^4) = m(\theta + 1) = (\theta+1)^4 + (\theta+1) + 1 = \theta^4 + \theta + 1 = 0$. Thus $\theta^4$ is a root of $m(x)$.
			- $m(\theta^8) = m((\theta^4)^2) = m((\theta+1)^2) = m(\theta^2 + 1) = (\theta^2+1)^4 + (\theta^2 + 1) + 1 = 0$. Thus $\theta^8$ is a root of $m(x)$.
			- Since $\theta^{16} = \theta$, we have $m(\theta^{2^n}) = 0$ for all $n \ge 0$. Thus $\{\theta, \theta^2, \theta^4 = \theta + 1, \theta^8 = \theta^2 + 1\}$ are all distinct roots of $m(x)$.

- **Thm 6.24**: Let $F_q$ be a finite field of $q=p^k$ elements, and let $I_q(d)=\#\{g \in F_q[x] : \deg(g) = d,\text{ irr, monic}\}$ be the number of monic irreducible polynomials with $\deg(g) = d$ over $F_q$. Then
	1. Let $n \ge 1 \in \mathbb{Z}$, then

		$$
		x^{q^n} - x = \prod_{d \mid n} \prod_{g \in F_q[x], \text{ monic, irr} \atop \deg(g) = d} g(x)
		$$

	2. We have the following identity, which can help us to compute $I_q(d)$:

		$$
		q^n = \sum_{d \mid n} d \cdot I_q(d)
		$$

	3. By the Möbius inversion formula, we have

		$$
		I_q(n) = \frac{1}{n} \sum_{d \mid n} \mu(d) q^{\frac{n}{d}}
		$$

		where $\mu(d)$ is the Möbius function defined by

		$$
		\mu(d) = \begin{cases} 1 & d = 1 \\ (-1)^k & d = \prod_{i=1}^k p_i \text{ for distinct primes } p_i \\ 0 & \exists p \text{ s.t. } p^2 \mid d \end{cases}
		$$

